(sec:tangent-vectors)=
# Tangent vectors

In the previous section, we define a vector field on a manifold $M$ as a map from a smooth function to another smooth function on the same manifold. In other words, a vector field acts on a scalar field and output another scalar field.  In this section, we focus on vectors at a particular point $p$ on a manifold.  We write it as $v_p = v(f)\Big|_p$ where $\Big|_p$ means that the function is evaluated at $p$.  We sahll call it a tangent vector.  The origin of the name becomes clear soon.  While a vector field is a map from $\mathbb{C}^\infty(M)$ to $\mathbb{C}^\infty(M)$, a tangent vector $v_p$ is a map from $\mathbb{C}^\infty(M)$ to $\mathbb{R}$.

Since we need to evaluate the vector field only at a point, it is not necessary to find the field beyond a point $p$.  There is a direct way to define $v_p$ without finding he vector field using a vector tangent to a curve. The idea is similar to the relation between a trajectory of a particle and its velocity.  Consider a trajectory $x(t)$ in the Euclidean space $\mathbb{R}^n$.  The velocity  is given by a derivative $v(t)=\frac{d}{dt} x(t)$.  Since the velocity vector is tangent to the trajectory, we call it tangent vector.   When the particle goes through a point $x_p$, the velocity vector at $x_p$  is $v(t_p)=\frac{d}{dt} x(t)\Big|_{t_p}$ where $t_p$ is the time the particle pass through $x_P$ along the curve.  You can generate any vector at $x_p$ using an appropriate trajectory that goes through $x_p$. 

Now we extend this idea to general manifolds. Consider a parametric curve $\gamma_M(\tau)$ on a manifold $M$ where $\tau$ is a real parameter in $\mathbb{R}$.  $\gamma_M(\tau)$ and $\tau$ are not necessarily a trajectory of particle and time. The curve $\gamma$ is a smooth map from $\mathbb{R}$ to $M$.   We assume that the curve goes through a point $p \in M$ at $\tau=\tau_p$, i.e. $p=\gamma(\tau_p)$. In addition we use a smooth function $f_M: \mathcal{M} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$.  Then, $f_M(\gamma_M(\tau))$ is a smooth function of $\tau$. Then, we define a tangent vector as $\frac{d}{d\tau} \gamma \Big|_{t_p}$.  But we don;t know hot to do it on the manifold.  To evaluate the derivative, we need a function. Let us introduce a smooth function $f: M \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$. Both $\tau$ and $f(p)$ are on $\mathbb{R}$, the derivative $\frac{d}{\tau} f(\gamma(\tau))$ is defined.  This derivative should indirectly give us information of $\frac{d}{d\tau} \gamma$ via the chain rule,  However, as usual, we need to evaluate it on a chart, $\phi: U \subseteq M \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^n$ where the open set $U$ includes $p$.

The corresponding curve $\gamma_R(\tau)$ on $\mathbb{R}^n$ is given by $\gamma_R(\tau) = \phi(\gamma_M(\tau))$.  
In the coordinate system $\gamma_R$ has $n$ components $\gamma_R = (\gamma_R^1, \gamma_R^2, \cdots, \gamma_R^n)$.  Function $f_M$ becomes $f_R  = F_M \circ \phi^{-1}$ on the chart.   Now, the original derivative on $M$  becomes $\frac{d}{d\tau} f_R(\gamma_R(\tau))\Big|_{\tau_p}$, which we can evaluate.

```{math}
:label: eq:tangent-vevctor-on-chart
\frac{d}{d\tau} f_M(\gamma_M(\tau))\Big|_p \xrightarrow{\phi} \frac{d}{d\tau} f_R(\gamma_R(\tau))\Big|_{\tau_p} = \frac{d \gamma_R^\mu}{d \tau} \partial_\mu f_R \Big|_{\tau_p}
```

where we used the chain rule. The result is a directional derivative.  Comparing the vector field {eq}`eq:vector-field-on-chart`,we find 

```{math}
:label: eq:tangent-vector-components
v^\mu_p \equiv v^\mu(\gamma_R(\tau_p)) = \frac{d \gamma_R^\mu}{d\tau}\Big|_{\tau_p}
```

which is a tangent vector on $\mathbb{R}$ like the velocity.  This component does not depend on the choice of function $f_R$.  It depends only on the curve and the chart.  Hence, mathematicians often write it in an abstract form:

```{math}
:label: eq:tangent-vector-on-manifold
v_p = \frac{d}{d\tau} 
```

Of course, this expression does not make a sense unless a curve $\gamma_M(\lambda)$ and  a evaluation point $p$ are specified.  So, we interpret the mysterious expression as

```{math}
:label: eq:tangent-vector-on-chart-no-function
v_p = \frac{d}{d \tau}\quad \xrightarrow{\phi}\quad v^\mu_p \partial_\mu
```

As the velocity vectors, any tangent vector can be generated by choosing an appropriate curve that goes through a specified point $p$. The set of all tangent vectors at $p$ on $M$ forms a tangent space $T_p M$.

Now, we  check if tangent vectors satisfy the requirements as vector fields.  The lininearity is automatically satisfied since the derivative $\frac{d}{d\lambda}$ ls linear.  For $g,g \in \mathbb{C}^\infty(M)$ and $\alpha \in \mathbb{R}$,

```{math}
:label: eq:ltangent-vector-linearity
\frac{d}{d \tau} (f + g) = \frac{d}{d \tau} f(\gamma(\tau)) + \frac{d}{d \tau} (g\gamma(\tau)) \\

\frac{d}{d \tau} (\alpha f(\gamma(\tau))) = \alpha \frac{d}{d \tau} f(\gamma(\tau)))
```

As for addition and scalar multiplication, mathematicians write even more mysterious expression, $\frac{d}{d\tau} + \frac{d}{d \sigma} = \frac{d}{d \xi}$  as addition of tangents vectors.  That means one tangent vector is defined with a curve $\gamma(\tau)$ and another tangent vector with a different curve $\eta(\sigma)$.  When they are added, the result is another tangent vector defined with another curve $\chi(\xi)$.  We interpret it as

```{math}
:label: eq:tangent-vector-addition
\frac{d}{d\tau}f(\gamma(\tau)) + \frac{d}{d\sigma} f(\eta(\sigma)) = \frac{d}{d\xi} f (\chi(\xi))
```

which means that the addition of two tangent vector generated by two curves can be always expressed as a single tangent vector generated by a single curve.

Multiplication of scalar function $g$ to a tangent vector is simply

```{math}
:label: eq:tangent-vector-scalar-multiple
(g v)(f) = \left(g \frac{d}{d\tau}\right) f(\gamma(\tau)) =  g \left(\frac{d}{d\tau} f(\gamma(\tau))\right)
```

which seems obvious.  Now the tangent vectors satisfied all requirements.

